---
layout: page
title: About me
order: 2
navlink: about
navtitle: about
---

<p class="message"><strong>Disclaimer:</strong> I like overdramatising and
making fun of myself. Keep this in mind.</p>

Hey there!

I am a talented [drama queen](http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/drama_queen)
with poor to none self-confidence.

Before this state of mind, I got a PhD in Mathematics from [Aix-Marseille
Université](http://www.univ-amu.fr/) and in Computer Science from
[Università di Bologna](http://www.unibo.it/). I worked on esoteric
algebraic (in the sense of vector spaces) extensions of the [pure
&#x3BB;-calculus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lambda_calculus), meaning
that I played [Sisyphus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sisyphus) for 3 long
years. Despite the fact I rather like Albert Camus' interpretation of life
in ["The myth of
Sisyphus"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Myth_of_Sisyphus), its
practicing felt quite alienating. By the way, in case you enjoy reading
mathematical nonsense, my dissertation is
[here]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ site.data }}main.pdf).

Before that, I got a double Master's degree in Computer Science from [ENS
de Lyon](http://www.ens-lyon.eu/) and [Università di
Bologna](http://www.unibo.it/), where I mostly focused on foundational
studies. I have been trapped by shining mathematical abstractions, that
have led me to study type systems and foundations of computer science
({&#x3BB;,&pi;}-calculus, linear logic, etc.).

Realised that I am not capable enough of doing fundamental research in
computer science, I am now chasing professional happiness as a software
engineer, while pursuing my dramatic lifestyle.

During the day, I normally try to play around with the
[OCaml](http://www.ocaml.org/) and [Haskell](http://www.haskell.org/)
functional programming languages. Lately, I have been interested in the
[MirageOS project](http://openmirage.org/).

Twice a week I find myself happy while giving my best at
[Grusol](http://grusol.it/) (in Italian).

See ya!

###About this site

Built using [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com) and [Zurb
Foundation](http://foundation.zurb.com) on [GitHub
Pages](http://pages.github.com) (after [Amir
Chaudhry's](http://amirchaudhry.com)).